Presentation
Title: Finding what is real and reproducible in microbiome datasets

Short summary:
I will present issues with the current non-robust interpretation of microbiome datasets. The human microbiome is correlated with many determinants of health status, and new candidate taxa are seemingly identified nearly every day. However, microbiome science is not nearly as reproducible or predictive as is commonly perceived and seemingly arbitrary decisions on sample collection, sequencing protocol or analysis pipeline can have far-reaching consequences on interpretation. In part, this is because of the use of 16S rRNA gene sequencing methods which uses short sequences as proxies to determine function or taxonomy, and in part because the data are not what they seem. I will show how  moving beyond tag-sequencing to shotgun metagenomics, and incorporating a probabilistic and compositional approach can bring added value to the analyses that provides a robust way forward for marker gene studies, metagenomics and metatranscriptomic analyses.

3 main points/key elements
1) Common statistical methods for 16S rRNA gene sequencing can be very misleading
2) Many microbiome datasets are uninformative because of this
3) Higher-resolution methods are required to extract useful information

Speaker
Name: Greg Gloor, PhD in Biochemistry,
Job title: Professor of Biochemistry
Speaker Photo
Short speaker bio:

Dr. Gloor is a Professor in the Department of Biochemistry at the University of Western Ontario. He has used DNA sequencing as a major tool for most of his career, having sequenced (by hand) part of bacteriophage Mu duing his PhD work. His group was one of the first to use high throughput sequencing platforms for bacterial genome assembly, microbial ecology and meta-transcriptomics.

Members of Dr. Gloor’s group are early adopters of compositional data analysis (CoDa) techniques to the analysis of high-throughput sequencing data. He is a founding member of the Compositional Data Analysis Society. Dr. Gloor has written several guides on how to use CoDa to analyze 16S rRNA gene sequencing data and transcriptome data, and maintains the ALDEx2 Bioconductor R package that performs differential abundance analysis using a CoDa paradigm. Dr. Gloor is developing CoDaSeq, an R package that combines and adapts a number of tools used for CoDa in other domains to the sparse, high dimensional datasets that are generated by high throughput sequencing.

In addition, to computational analysis, Dr. Gloor’s group developed a general combinatorial barcoding for the Illumina sequencing platforms that is not dependent on sample diversity. The strategy has been used to sequence amplify 16S rRNA gene fragments and many other low diversity amplicons for sequence variant detection.


Company: The University of Western Ontario

Short company profile: The University of Western Ontario is a publicly-funded research-intensive public university located in London, Ontario Canada. It was founded in 1878 and has grown to an instituion with over 30000 undergradduate and 5000 graduate students. The University of Western Ontario consistently ranks as one of the top institutions in Canada and Globally for both undergraduate education and research productivity.

Company logo:
